.. _state-events:

State Event Handling
--------------------

Now that we have already introduced both :ref:`time events
<cooling-revisited>` and :ref:`state events <bouncing-ball>`, let's
examine some important complications associated with state events.
Surprisingly, these complications can be introduced by even simple
models.

Basic Decay Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Consider the following almost trivial model:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/Decay/Decay1.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

If we attempt to simulate this model for 5 seconds, we find that the
simulation terminates after about 2 seconds with the following trajectory:

.. plot:: ../plots/Decay1.py
   :class: interactive

Again, numerical issues creep in.  Even though mathematically it
should not be possible for the value of ``x`` to drop below zero,
using numerical integration techniques it is possible for small
amounts of error to creep in and drive ``x`` below zero.  When that
happens, the ``sqrt(x)`` expression generates a floating point
exception and the simulation terminates.

Guard Expressions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To prevent this, we might introduce an ``if`` expression to guard
against evaluating the square root of a negative number, like this:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/Decay/Decay2.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

Simulating this model we get the following trajectory [#tol]_:

.. plot:: ../plots/Decay2.py
   :class: interactive

Again, the simulation fails.  But why?  It fails for the same reason,
a numerical exception that results from taking the square root of a
negative number.

Most people are quite puzzled when they see an error message about a
floating point exception like this (or, for example division by zero)
after they have introduced a guard expression as we have done.  They
naturally assume that there is no way that ``sqrt(x)`` can be
evaluated if ``x`` is less than zero.  **But this assumption is incorrect.**

Events and Conditional Expressions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Given the ``if`` expression:

.. code-block:: modelica

    der(x) = if x>=0 sqrt(x) else 0;

it is entirely possible that ``sqrt`` will be called with a negative
argument.  The reason is related to the fact that this is a state
event.  Remember, the time at which a *time event* will occur is known
in advance.  But this is not the case for a state event.  In order to
determine when the event will occur, we have to search the solution
trajectory to see when the condition (*e.g.,* ``x>=0`` becomes
false).

The important thing to understand is that **until the event occurs,
the behavior doesn't change**.  In other words, the two sides of this
``if`` expression represent two types of behavior, ``der(x)=sqrt(x)``
and ``der(x)=0``.  Since ``x`` is initially greater than zero, the
initial behavior is ``der(x)=sqrt(x)``.  **The solver will continue
using this equation until it has determined the time of the event**
represented by ``x>=0``.  In order to determine the time of that
event, **it must go past the point where the value of the conditional
expression changes**.  This means that while attempting to determine
precisely when the condition ``x>=0`` changes from true to false, it
will continue to use the equation ``der(x)=sqrt(x)`` even though ``x``
is negative.

Most users initially assume that each time ``der(x)`` is evaluated,
the ``if`` expression is evaluated (specifically the conditional
expression in the ``if`` expression).  Hopefully the previous
paragraph has made it clear that this is not the case.  But the
question remains.  Why?

The reason has to do with performance.  If the conditional expression
led to an abrupt change in behavior (like the one we saw in our
discussion on :ref:`cooling-revisited`) it would cause a variable time
step integrator to spend an exceptional (and unnecessary) amount of
time trying to localize the source of the additional integration
error.  Because the integrator doesn't know *a priori* where the event
occurs (as with a time event) and it has no way to quickly identify
the point at which the event occurs, it has no choice but to
repeatedly re-attempt the integration step until it finds a step size
where the integration error is tolerable.

This time spent trying and retrying integration steps can be saved
thanks to the fact that Modelica can extract a so-called "zero
crossing" function from the ``if`` expression.  This function is
called a zero crossing function because it is normally constructed to
have a root at the point where the event will occur.  For example, if
we had the following ``if`` expression:

.. code-block:: modelica

    y = if a>b then 1 else 0;

The zero crossing function would be :math:`a-b`.  This function is
chosen because it changes from positive to negative precisely at the
point where ``a>b``.

Recall our previous equation:

.. code-block:: modelica

    der(x) = if x>=0 sqrt(x) else 0;

In this case, the zero crossing function is simply :math:`x` since the
event occurs when :math:`x` itself crosses zero.

The Modelica compiler collects all the zero crossing functions in the
model for the integrator to use.  During integration, the integrator
checks to see if any of the zero crossing functions have changed
sign.  If they have, it uses the solution it computed during that step
to interpolate the zero crossing function to find the location, in
time, of the root of the zero crossing function and this is the point
in time where the event occurs.  This process is much more efficient
because the root finding algorithms have more information to help them
identify to location of the root (information like the derivative of
the zero crossing function) and evaluation is very cheap because it
doesn't involve taking additional integration steps, only evaluating
the interpolation functions from the triggering integration step.

.. index: noEvent

.. _no-event:

Event Suppression
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

But after all this, it still isn't clear how to avoid the problems we
saw in the ``Decay1`` and ``Decay2`` models.  The answer is a special
operator called ``noEvent``.  The ``noEvent`` operator suppresses this
special event handling.  Instead, it does what most users expected
would happen in the first place, which is to evaluate the conditional
expression for every value of ``x``.  We can see the ``noEvent``
operator in action in the following model:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/Decay/Decay3.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

and the results can be seen here:

.. plot:: ../plots/Decay3.py
   :class: interactive

Now the simulation completes without any problem.  This is because the
use of ``noEvent`` ensures that ``sqrt(x)`` is never called with a
negative value of ``x``.

It might seems strange that we have to explicitly include the
``noEvent`` operator in order to get what we consider the most
intuitive behavior.  Why not make the default behavior the most
intuitive one?  The answer is performance.  Using conditional
expressions to generate events improves the performance of the
simulations by giving the solver clues about when to expect abrupt
changes in behavior.  Most of the time, this approach doesn't cause
any problem.  The examples we have presented in this chapter were
designed to highlight this issue, but they are not representative of
most cases.  For this reason, ``noEvent`` is not the default, but must
be used explicitly.  It should be noted that the ``noEvent`` operator
should only be used when there is a smooth transition in behavior,
otherwise it can create performance issues.

Chattering
^^^^^^^^^^

There is a common effect known as "chattering" that you will run into
sooner or later with Modelica.  Consider the following model:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/Decay/Decay4.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

Simulating this model gives us the following results:

.. plot:: ../plots/Decay4.py
   :class: interactive

This model is interesting because looking at it, one might assume the
equation:

.. code-block:: modelica

    der(x) = if x>=0 then -x else -x;

was equivalent to:

.. code-block:: modelica

    der(x) = -x;

After all, each branch in the ``if`` expression evaluates to ``-x``
and the simulated result appears to be consistent with this
assumption.  **But these two equations are not equivalent**.  The
difference, as we've already discussed in this section, is that the
one with the conditional expression generates an event.  This means it
will force the solver to truncate time steps and restart the
simulation.

Let's take a step back and consider the mathematical solution to this
problem.  We would expect the solution trajectory for ``x`` to be a
decaying exponential that asymptotically approaches zero.  The problem
is that zero is exactly where the event happens.  Keep in mind that
the numerical solver will introduce small amounts of local error on
each step when integrating these equations.  As a result, the answer
will (at least in general) not be exactly zero.  Instead it will be
slightly above or below zero.

This kind of model can introduce an effect known as "chattering".
Chattering is simply the degradation in simulation performance due to
a large number of events occurring that artificially shorten the time
steps taken by the solver.  What we see in the ``Decay4`` model is
that the solution asymptotically approaches a point where an event
occurs.  This is not uncommon, so it is important to watch out for such
cases because they can unnecessarily slow down simulations.  The
important thing about the ``Decay4`` example is that it is physically
realistic and has a smooth solution, but still suffers from degraded
simulation performance because of the high frequency of events.

One obvious solution would be to remove the ``if`` expression entirely
from this example.  It should be noted that while the ``Decay4`` model
is a bit contrived, because it has the **same** expression regardless
of how the conditional expression is evaluated, there are many
physically realistic use cases where a solution variable will converge
asymptotically to the location of a state event.  For example, we
might have changed our differential equation to be:

.. code-block:: modelica

  der(x) = if x>=0 then -x else -2*x;

Here we have a different "gain" depending on the sign of ``x``.  These
kinds of cases do show up in realistic models.  So the question is,
how do we avoid the chattering that can occur in these cases.

This is another case where the ``noEvent`` operator can help us out.
Because we know that this ``if`` expression doesn't introduce any
abrupt changes in behavior, we can wrap the conditional expression
with the ``noEvent`` operator as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/Decay/Decay5.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

In doing so, we will get the same solution, but with better simulation
performance:

.. plot:: ../plots/Decay5.py
   :class: interactive

.. todo: Smooth operator?

.. [#tol] This model will not always fail.  The failure depends on how
	  much integration error is introduced and this, in turn,
	  depends on the numerical tolerances used.
